Blazor WASM lazy load assemblies topic (#19211)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/blazor/webassembly-lazy-load-assemblies.md

---
title: Lazy load assemblies in ASP.NET Core Blazor WebAssembly
author: guardrex
description: Discover how to lazy load assemblies in ASP.NET Core Blazor WebAssembly apps.
monikerRange: '>= aspnetcore-5.0'
ms.author: riande
ms.custom: mvc
ms.date: 07/15/2020
no-loc: [Blazor, "Blazor Server", "Blazor WebAssembly", "Identity", "Let's Encrypt", Razor, SignalR]
uid: blazor/webassembly-lazy-load-assemblies
---
# Lazy load assemblies in ASP.NET Core Blazor WebAssembly

By [Safia Abdalla](https://safia.rocks) and [Luke Latham](https://github.com/guardrex)

> Blazor WebAssembly app startup performance can be improved by dynamically loading assets at runtime when the assets are required, which is called *lazy loading*. For example, assemblies that are only used to render a single component can be set up to load only if the user navigates to that component. After loading, the assemblies are cached client-side and don't require reloading while the app is running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blazor WebAssembly app startup performance can be improved by loading assets at runtime when the assets are required, which is called *lazy loading*. For example, assemblies that are only used to render a single component can be set up to load only if the user navigates to that component. After loading, the assemblies are cached client-side and don't require reloading while the app is running.
```

> [!NOTE]
> Assembly lazy loading doesn't benefit Blazor Server apps because assemblies aren't downloaded to the client in a Blazor Server app.

## Project file

Mark assemblies for lazy loading in the app's project file (`.csproj`) using the `BlazorWebAssemblyLazyLoad` item. The Blazor framework prevents the assemblies from loading at app launch. The following example marks a large custom assembly (`GrantImaharaRobotControls.dll`) for lazy loading. Add a separate `BlazorWebAssemblyLazyLoad` item for each assembly.

```xml
<ItemGroup>

>   <BlazorWebAssemblyLazyLoad Include="GrantImaharaRobotControls.dll" />

Reviewer: We made a change and you don't actually need the `.dll` extension anymore.

```suggestion
  <BlazorWebAssemblyLazyLoad Include="GrantImaharaRobotControls" />
```

</ItemGroup>
```

Only assemblies that are used by the app can be lazily loaded. The linker strips unused assemblies from published output.

## `Router` component

Code in the `Router` component determines when the assemblies marked for lazy loading are loaded.

In the app's `Router` component (`App.razor`):

> * Add an `OnNavigateAsync` callback. The `OnNavigateAsync` handler is invoked when the user visits a route for the first time or navigates to a new route.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add an `OnNavigateAsync` callback. The `OnNavigateAsync` handler is invoked when the user visits a route for the first time by navigating to it directly from their browser or navigates to a new route using a link or a `NavigationManager.NavigateTo` invocation.
```

* Add a [List](xref:System.Collections.Generic.List%601)\<<xref:System.Reflection.Assembly>> (for example, named `lazyLoadedAssemblies`) to the component. The assemblies are passed back to the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Routing.Router.AdditionalAssemblies> collection in case the assemblies contain routable components. The framework searches the assemblies for routes and updates the route collection if any new routes are found.

```razor
@using System.Reflection

<Router AppAssembly="@typeof(Program).Assembly" 
    AdditionalAssemblies="@lazyLoadedAssemblies" OnNavigateAsync="@OnNavigateAsync">
    ...
</Router>

@code {
    private List<Assembly> lazyLoadedAssemblies = new List<Assembly>();

    private async Task OnNavigateAsync(NavigationContext args)
    {
    }
}
```

### Assembly load logic in `OnNavigateAsync`

`OnNavigateAsync` has a `NavigationContext` parameter that provides information about the current asynchronous navigation event, including the target path (`Path`) and the cancellation token (`CancellationToken`):

* The `Path` property is the user's destination path relative to the app's base path, such as `/robot`.

> * The `CancellationToken` can be used to observe the cancellation of the asynchronous task. `OnNavigateAsync` automatically cancels the currently running navigation task when the user navigates away from a page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `CancellationToken` can be used to observe the cancellation of the asynchronous task. `OnNavigateAsync` automatically cancels the currently running navigation task when the user navigates to a different page.
```

Inside `OnNavigateAsync`, implement logic to determine the assemblies to load. Options include:

* Conditional checks inside the `OnNavigateAsync` method.
* A lookup table that maps routes to assembly names, either injected into the component or implemented within the [`@code`](xref:mvc/views/razor#code) block.

`LazyAssemblyLoader` is a framework-provided singleton service for loading assemblies. Inject `LazyAssemblyLoader` into the `Router` component:

```razor
...
@using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.WebAssembly.Services
@inject LazyAssemblyLoader assemblyLoader

...
```

> The `LazyAssemblyLoader` provides the `LoadAssembliesAsync` method that:

Reviewer: Let's add a note here that the `LazyAssemblyLoader` is compatible with pre-rendering scenarios. When pre-rendering, we don't lazy-load since all of the assemblies are on the server where the pre-rendering is done and the JSRuntime is not available when pre-rendering.

Author: Covered on Line 87

Reviewer: > "the JSRuntime is not available" ... seemed less important given that the app has access to assemblies directly that are already loaded, and that's already stated.

That's a good point. This is probably not an important detail for an end-user to know so we can nuke it.

* Uses JS interop to fetch assemblies via a network call.

> * Loads assemblies into the runtime executing on WASM in the browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Loads assemblies into the runtime executing on WebAssembly in the browser.
```

@inject LazyAssemblyLoader assemblyLoader

<Router AppAssembly="@typeof(Program).Assembly" 
    AdditionalAssemblies="@lazyLoadedAssemblies" OnNavigateAsync="@OnNavigateAsync">
    <Navigating>
        <div style="padding:20px;background-color:blue;color:white">
            <p>Loading the requested page&hellip;</p>
        </div>
    </Navigating>
    <Found Context="routeData">
        <RouteView RouteData="@routeData" DefaultLayout="@typeof(MainLayout)" />
    </Found>
    <NotFound>
        <LayoutView Layout="@typeof(MainLayout)">
            <p>Sorry, there's nothing at this address.</p>
        </LayoutView>
    </NotFound>
</Router>

@code {
    private List<Assembly> lazyLoadedAssemblies = new List<Assembly>();

    private async Task OnNavigateAsync(NavigationContext args)
    {
        try
        {
            if (args.Path.EndsWith("/robot"))
            {
                var assemblies = await assemblyLoader.LoadAssembliesAsync(
                    new List<string>() { "GrantImaharaRobotControls.dll" });
                lazyLoadedAssemblies.AddRange(assemblies);
            }
        }
        catch (Exception ex)
        {
            ...
        }
    }
}

> ```

Reviewer: We should add a note that says if the `OnNavigateAsync` callback throws an unhandled exception then we will surface the Blazor error UI (the little yellow bar at the bottom).

This is a recent change that I am introducing in https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pull/23947.

---
title: Lazy load assemblies in ASP.NET Core Blazor WebAssembly
author: guardrex
description: Discover how to lazy load assemblies in ASP.NET Core Blazor WebAssembly apps.
monikerRange: '>= aspnetcore-5.0'
ms.author: riande
ms.custom: mvc
ms.date: 07/16/2020
no-loc: [Blazor, "Blazor Server", "Blazor WebAssembly", "Identity", "Let's Encrypt", Razor, SignalR]
uid: blazor/webassembly-lazy-load-assemblies
---
# Lazy load assemblies in ASP.NET Core Blazor WebAssembly

By [Safia Abdalla](https://safia.rocks) and [Luke Latham](https://github.com/guardrex)

> Blazor WebAssembly app startup performance can be improved by loading assets at runtime when the assets are required, which is called *lazy loading*. For example, assemblies that are only used to render a single component can be set up to load only if the user navigates to that component. After loading, the assemblies are cached client-side and don't require reloading while the app is running.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Blazor WebAssembly app startup performance can be improved by loading assets at runtime when the assets are required, which is called *lazy loading*. For example, assemblies that are only used to render a single component can be set up to load only if the user navigates to that component. After loading, the assemblies are cached client-side and are available for all future navigations.
```

Reviewer 2: I guess reloading has very specific meaning in browser \ webassembly, we might want to avoid conflating the two.

> Blazor WebAssembly app startup performance can be improved by loading assets at runtime when the assets are required, which is called *lazy loading*. For example, assemblies that are only used to render a single component can be set up to load only if the user navigates to that component. After loading, the assemblies are cached client-side and don't require reloading while the app is running.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Blazor WebAssembly app startup performance can be improved by deferring the loading of some application assemblies until they are required, which is called *lazy loading*. For example, assemblies that are only used to render a single component can be set up to load only if the user navigates to that component. After loading, the assemblies are cached client-side and don't require reloading while the app is running.
```

Maybe? I don't know if users necessarily understand what runtime means or how it's different from when you start the app.

Blazor's lazy loading feature allows you to mark certain app assemblies as lazy-loadable then load them during runtime when the user navigates to a particular route. The feature consists of changes to the project file and changes to the application's router.

> [!NOTE]
> Assembly lazy loading doesn't benefit Blazor Server apps because assemblies aren't downloaded to the client in a Blazor Server app.

## Project file

> Mark assemblies for lazy loading in the app's project file (`.csproj`) using the `BlazorWebAssemblyLazyLoad` item. Use the assembly name without the `.dll` extension. The Blazor framework prevents the assemblies specified by this item group from loading at app launch. The following example marks a large custom assembly (`GrantImaharaRobotControls.dll`) for lazy loading.

Reviewer: Yes, they need to define the closure. Good point to clarify.

* Add an [`@using`](xref:mvc/views/razor#using) directive for the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Routing?displayProperty=fullName> namespace.
* Add a `<Navigating>` tag to the component with markup to display during page transition events.

```razor
...
@using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Routing
...

<Router ...>
    <Navigating>
        <div style="...">
            <p>Loading the requested page&hellip;</p>
        </div>
    </Navigating>
</Router>

...
```

### Handle cancellations in `OnNavigateAsync`

The `NavigationContext` object passed to the `OnNavigateAsync` callback contains a `CancellationToken` that's set when a new navigation event occurs. The `OnNavigateAsync` callback must throw when this cancellation token is set to avoid continuing to run the `OnNavigateAsync` callback on a outdated navigation.

If a user navigates to Route A and then immediately to Route B, the app shouldn't continue running the `OnNavigateAsync` callback for Route A:

```razor
@inject HttpClient Http
@inject ProductCatalog Products

<Router AppAssembly="@typeof(Program).Assembly" 
    OnNavigateAsync="@OnNavigateAsync">
    ...
</Router>

@code {

>     private async Task OnNavigateAsync(NavigationContext args)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    private async Task OnNavigateAsync(NavigationContext context)
```

    {
        if (args.Path == "/about") 
        {
            var stats = new Stats = { Page = "/about" };
            await Http.PostAsJsonAsync("api/visited", stats, args.CancellationToken);
        }
        else if (args.Path == "/store")
        {
            var productIds = [345, 789, 135, 689];
            foreach (var productId in productIds) 
            {

>                 args.CancellationToken.ThrowIfCancellationRequested();

Reviewer 2: This is like a API thing. Usually the cancelation token ends up being part of the async method signature i.e. it's more common to see: `OnNavigateAsync(NavigationContext context, CancelationToken cts)`. Nothing to do here, just something that came to me when I saw this.

                Products.Prefetch(productId);
            }
        }
    }
}
```

> [!NOTE]

> > Not throwing if the cancellation token in `NavigationContext` is set can result in unintended behavior, such as rendering a component from a previous navigation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Not throwing if the cancellation token in `NavigationContext` is canceled can result in unintended behavior, such as rendering a component from a previous navigation.
```

@inject LazyAssemblyLoader assemblyLoader

<Router AppAssembly="@typeof(Program).Assembly" 
    AdditionalAssemblies="@lazyLoadedAssemblies" OnNavigateAsync="@OnNavigateAsync">
    <Navigating>
        <div style="padding:20px;background-color:blue;color:white">
            <p>Loading the requested page&hellip;</p>
        </div>
    </Navigating>
    <Found Context="routeData">
        <RouteView RouteData="@routeData" DefaultLayout="@typeof(MainLayout)" />
    </Found>
    <NotFound>
        <LayoutView Layout="@typeof(MainLayout)">
            <p>Sorry, there's nothing at this address.</p>
        </LayoutView>
    </NotFound>
</Router>

@code {
    private List<Assembly> lazyLoadedAssemblies = new List<Assembly>();

    private async Task OnNavigateAsync(NavigationContext args)
    {
        try
        {
            if (args.Path.EndsWith("/robot"))
            {
                var assemblies = await assemblyLoader.LoadAssembliesAsync(
                    new List<string>() { "GrantImaharaRobotControls.dll" });
                lazyLoadedAssemblies.AddRange(assemblies);
            }
        }
        catch (Exception ex)
        {
            ...
        }
    }
}
```

> ## Troubleshoot

Reviewer 2: 👏

  * Navigates to a new route using a link or a <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.NavigationManager.NavigateTo%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> invocation.
* Add a [List](xref:System.Collections.Generic.List%601)\<<xref:System.Reflection.Assembly>> (for example, named `lazyLoadedAssemblies`) to the component. The assemblies are passed back to the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Routing.Router.AdditionalAssemblies> collection in case the assemblies contain routable components. The framework searches the assemblies for routes and updates the route collection if any new routes are found.

> [!NOTE]

> > If lazy-loaded assemblies do not contain any routeable components, can omit this step.

Reviewer: Got it. I wasn't aware it was an OK pattern to have a bullet without a note.

> > If lazy-loaded assemblies do not contain any routeable components, can omit this step.

Author: I might be misinterpreting what "this step" means ... i.e., what the NOTE is supposed to apply to.
